---
layout: post
title: "Mental Health Metaphors, Critical Theory, and the Baby Boomers"
date: 2018-11-07 16:20:00 -0500
---

# mental health metaphors, critical theory, and the baby boomers

Ed Burmila's recent piece in [the
Baffler](https://thebaffler.com/latest/twilight-of-the-racist-uncles-burmila)
has me thinking about the generational cohort of the baby boomers and the
use of mental health metaphors in critical theory. The Baby Boomers are
generationally defined as people born between 1946 and 1964, and by
defined I mean treated as a cohort by advertisers and pop psychologists.
The leading edge of the baby boomers is now turning 72, but they have more
in common with tailing end of the so-called "Silent Generation" that
preceded them, a generational cohort purportedly encompassing the years
1925-1945. 

These are the "racist uncles" empowered by Internet community in Burmila's
piece. As he argues,

>  Facebook’s core premise is that networking people is inherently good.
It turns out that networking shitty, racist people served only to better
organize and strengthen their hatreds. Old relatives who once screamed
into the void now know they have like-minded peers listening, Liking, and
responding in kind. Rather than concocting their own baseless conspiracy
theories, the magic of Facebook unites them around the Greatest Hits—the
blacks, the immigrants, the Jews, the liberals, the government—and writes
the script for them. Facebook was the medium that allowed the right to
homogenize reactionary politics into a single, connected mass of outrage,
and the consequences we see today are just the tip of an iceberg.

Of course, it's not only old relatives who who have embraced the Greatest
Hits of reactionary conservatism, which is a problem with Burmila's piece.
In many ways, it's a case of white America having abandoned rationality
for conspiracy, immigrant scapegoating, and racial reaction, a catharsis
of anxiety and paranoia rooted in a collective freakout over the election
of Obama, but also of the ravages of 21st-century capitalism. Which is to
say that I think it is generous of Burmila to place the inability of many
Americans to adapt to the accelerationism of the internet's information
economy, because it is much more widespread than that.

Burmila puts Facebook's attention model squarely at the center of his
indictment of Boomers:

> Like the president they so blindly love, the brains they once had become
a puddle of Cracker Barrel sausage gravy strewn with flotsam and jetsam of
the Greatest Hits of the reactionary playbook. These are randomly sampled,
irrespective of time, logic, or coherence. Immigrant caravans! Soros! New
Black Panthers! Vince Foster! Card Check! Seth Rich! Uranium One! MS-13!
Crisis Actors! Anchor babies! Whitewater! Her emails! Cap and Trade!
Thugs! Birth Certificate! Every obsession is equally relevant. And the
right time to be very, very mad about all of it is right now.

Reading that, I thought of the descent into dementia, a scenario that
anyone with increasingly elderly parents born in the 1930s and 1940s is
fearful of confronting. Burmila describes a process aided and abetted by
Fox News and Facebook of what seems like a communal deterioration,
a shared isolation and paranoia. It's as if a large percentage of the US
population is subjected to a collective memory loss, mental decline,
irritability, lack of restraint, and paranoia. A social dementia. This
isn't an argument for individual mental health diagnoses, but rather in
the tradition of Erich Fromm's *The Sane Society* (1955), an argument for reframing
his question to ask instead of "Are we sane?," instead, "Are we demented?"

Fromm's original agenda in *The Sane Society* was to extend Freud's
paradigm in *Civilization and Its Discontents* to the identification and
analysis of the pathology of society, a situation that required an
immanent critique of the promises and dislocations of the condition of
modernity. That combination of marxian immanence and psychoanalysis was emblematic
of a project that sought to understand the appeal of fascism, but also to
offer both individual and social paths out of postwar alienation. Whilhem
Reich first explored a freudo-marxist critical theory in the late 1920s and early 1930s
with his *Dialectical Materialism and Psychoanalysis* (1929) and *Mass
Psychology of Fascism* (1933). Reich increasingly posited libidinal liberation as key to
social liberation.

I came to freudo-marxism not through Reich, but originally through
Marcuse. After finishing college, I de-converted from evangelical
Christianity, and Marcuse's *Eros and Civilization* (1955), published the
same year as Fromm's *The Sane Society*. *E&C* stood aside Norman Brown's
*Life Against Death* (1959) as a serious popularizer of a Freudian theory of
non-repressive society. To a young man suffering the consequences of
a highly repressive evangelicalism, *E&C* was, if you will, quite
seductive. I imagined that the liberative potential of the pleasure
principle applied to my own libido as much as its promise to overcome the
alienation of the reality principles drive for productivity and work.
I wanted "non-alienated libidinal work," even if it meant some continued
kind of sublimation.

Looking back on Fromm, Marcuse, Brown, and Reich today, I'm struck by the
fact that they were writing Freud into critical theory coterminous to the
Boomers' childhood and prepubescent adolescence. This is, of course,
likely coincidental. Marcuse's own son, Peter, was born in 1933, too early
for a Boomer. Norman Brown, who worked alongside Marcuse in the Office of
Strategic Services during World War II, married Elizabeth Potter in 1938,
and the couple had four children in the 1940s. Could it be that the
popularizers of freudian critical theory were in part reacting to the
generational emergence of the Boomers and the psychoanalytical challenge
of a world soaked in youth?

It's probably a silly idea. But, the next great psychoanalytical maneuver
in critical theory has another compelling correlation to the generational
cohort. In 1972, Deleuze and Guatarri published their provocative
*Anti-Oedipus*, which shifted the metaphor for alienation from Freud's
libidinal neurotic to the schizophrenic. For D&G, and also for a growing
group of radical psychoanalytical practitioners like R.D. Laing, the
schizophrenic stood as either a model of resistance to, or the outgrowth
of the identity obliterating effects of late capitalism's neoliberal turn
in the 1970s. D&G saw in the schizophrenic's inability to form a coherent
identity, a rationality that resisted capitalism's spectacle. To somewhat
different ends, Frederic Jameson [also used
schizophrenia](http://art.ucsc.edu/sites/default/files/Jameson_Postmodernism_and_Consumer_Society.pdf)
as an important category to understand the experience of
postmodernity/late capitalism. Jameson drew from Lacan in conceptualizing
the schizophrenic, and even went as far as to say that the clinical
accuracy of the category didn't matter. It was the force of the
schizophrenic's **experience** of (the lack) of personal identity that
mattered. Again, the prospect here as with Freudo-Marxism is not to deploy
individual psychiatric diagnoses, but to construct a metaphor of
alienation.

What connect then, to the Boomers? Coincidentally, the onset of
psychiatric symptoms of schizophrenia most often [manifests between the
ages of 16 and
30](http://art.ucsc.edu/sites/default/files/Jameson_Postmodernism_and_Consumer_Society.pdf),
the rough cohort age of the Boomers during the schizophrenic turn in
critical theory. 

Or is this coincidence? And if not, then what is the psychoanalytic
metaphor for the Boomers-run-roughshod-over-our-world for today? It might
be that the metaphor shouldn't be psychoanalytic, but rather neurological
in the category of Social Dementia. And more to the point, as the Boomers
and late Silent Generation start to make their slide into the isolation,
paranoia, and confusion of the information wasteland of Fox News and
Facebook lies in the theorizing those responses as a dementia, as
a subconscious freak out over the avalanche of information revealing their
alienation from a world that has changed around them. Our politics has
become reflexively paranoid, disoriented, confused, and mean because it
has been demented. Thomas Liggoti observes that, "All supernatural horror
obtains in what we believe should be and should not be." The state of
cosmic horror is a result of the confusion caused by the uncanny, the
paradox, the illusion. 

> Once you begin to feel you are making a go of it on your own-- that you
are making moves and thinking thoughts which seem to have originated
within you-- it is not possible for you to believe that you are anything
but your own master. (Ligotti, *The Conspiracy Against the Human Race*)

Of course, in the anthropocene and in oligarchy, the material world at its
profiteers reveal that you are not your own master. For the privileged of
society, this recognition is dissonant. A critical theory of the Boomers'
last stand will need to deal with the cohort's dissonance, it's horror or
recognition, and it's choosing dementia.


