---
title: Research
layout: page
---


My current research interests focus on gender, sexuality, and legal
cultures in the late-colonial and early republican Andes. I am the
author of *The Limits of Gender Domination: Women, the Law, and
Political Crisis in Quito* (Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press,
2010). From the book's description:

> Set against the backdrop of the tumultuous late colonial and early
> republican periods in Quito, Ecuador (1765-1830), this study views the
> relationship between the increasingly centralized power of Bourbon
> governance and the local operation of social authority through the
> lens of women's legal, economic, and social status. Black uses
> judicial documents, legal literatures, and institutional materials to
> examine women's changing legal, social, and economic status during the
> Bourbon reforms. By documenting the progresive removal of limits to
> patriarchal power in the waning years of the Spanish Empire in Quito,
> this study traces the genealogy of legal patriarchy in Spanish
> America.\

Feel free to click on the link on the right of this page to buy your own
copy! A super-concentrated version of that work is available as a [2007
article](/media/pdf/clar_article.pdf) in the Colonial Latin American
Review.\

With that project put to bed, I've got a number of others rattling
around in my head. There are a few articles in the queue. I'm finishing
revisions on an article on Female Sodomy in Bourbon Quito, assembling
the pieces together for an article that will statistically analyze Quito
city jail censuses from 1749 to 1853. I'm trying to work out the
significance of the shift from status to contract (proper recognition to
Henry Maine for the phrase) for women in the early Republic as
encapsulated in the changing legal categories, vecina, ciudadana,
Se√±ora. And, I've got a whole stack of murder cases I've been meaning to
read.\

On the heels of book one, though, I'm really interested in further
pursuing the connection between royal authority, sexuality, and the iron
cage of productive labor in the Bourbon period. Royal officials during
the reign of Charles III (1759-1788) pursued a whole array of reform
policies that were mapped onto the bodies of their peninsular and creole
subjects- racial, sexual, medical, tax, and legal policies that
produced, in some way, a social body politic usually associated with the
19th century. It's curious as the king's body (and particularly that
absolutist king's body) served as the metaphor for healthy political
authority and legitimacy, while the projection of that authority in the
late 18th-century came to increasingly rely on forms of surveillance
that constructed modern subjects. Or at least, that's the case in Quito.
I've applied for an NEH in support of this project. The project
narrative of my latest application is [here](/media/pdf/narrative.pdf).
It's an exciting project with a tremendous documentary base, the lion
share of which I hope to curate on its own project site, [Bourbon
Quito](http://bourbonquito.com).\

I often present my work at regional and international conferences on
Latin American history. Recent conference presentations include the
Rocky Mountain Conference on Latin America Studies (RMCLAS), 2011, 2007
and 2004, the South Eastern Conference on Latin American Studies
(SECOLAS), 2011, 2010, the American Society of Ethnohistory, 2008, the
American Historical Association/ Conference on Latin American History,
2006, 2009, 2010, 2011; and Latin American Studies Association, 2007 and
2004. For the 2007 Latin American Studies Association International
Congress, I co-organized a panel entitled "Unnatural Acts: 'Aberrant'
Sex and 'Normative' Gender in Colonial Latin America," which included a
paper of my own entitled "As (S)he Would Treat a Woman: Gender and
Same-Sex Love in Bourbon Quito."\

I have also researched and written on the modern indigenous movement in
Ecuador, a topic that continues to hold my interest.\

Finally, I would be remiss to exclude my growing interest in Digital
Humanities and Digital History. Though my research continues to
primarily engage my content specialty in early Latin America, I'm also
fascinated by and active in Digital Historical practices of publication,
curation, and teaching. Many of my thoughts on DH can be found on my
[blog](http://parezcoydigo.wordpress.com). I'm also happy to have a
forthcoming piece in Dan Cohen and Tom Scheinfeldt's forthcoming
[*Hacking the Academy: The Edited
Edition*](http://hackingtheacademy.org). See my [C.V.](/cv) for more.


